---
title: UFO Analysis with Data Science
---

 

**Introduction: Business Problem**

1.1. **Background**

According to Wikipedia [1], UFO is the popular term for any aerial phenomenon
that cannot immediately be identified. The term "UFO" was coined in 1953 by the
United States Air Force and in its initial definition, it was "any airborne
object which by performance, aerodynamic characteristics, or unusual features,
does not conform to any presently known aircraft or missile type, or which
cannot be positively identified as a familiar object." The Oxford English
Dictionary defines a UFO as "An unidentified flying object; a 'flying saucer'."
In popular usage, the term UFO came to be used to refer to claims of alien
spacecraft.

Unexplained aerial observations have been reported throughout history. For
example, on April 14, 1561, residents of Nuremberg described the appearance of a
large black triangular object. According to witnesses, there were also hundreds
of spheres, cylinders and other odd-shaped objects that moved erratically
overhead. On January 25, 1878, the Denison Daily News printed an article in
which John Martin, a local farmer, had reported seeing a large, dark, circular
object resembling a balloon flying "at wonderful speed." Martin, according to
the newspaper account, said it appeared to be about the size of a saucer, one of
the first uses of the word "saucer" in association with a UFO. These are just
two examples. Some of these observations were undoubtedly astronomical in
nature: comets, bright meteors, one or more of the five planets that can be
readily seen with the naked eye, planetary conjunctions, or atmospheric optical
phenomena such as parhelia and lenticular clouds.

Studies have established that the majority of UFO observations are misidentified
conventional objects or natural phenomena—most commonly aircraft, balloons
including sky lanterns, satellites, and astronomical objects such as meteors,
bright stars, and planets. A small percentage are hoaxes and fewer than 10% of
reported sightings remain unexplained after proper investigation, and therefore
can be classified as unidentified in the strictest sense. However, the null
hypothesis cannot be excluded for these reports in a sense that they are simply
other more prosaic phenomena that cannot be identified due to lack of complete
information or due to the necessary subjectivity of the reports. Proponents of
the extraterrestrial hypothesis suggest that these unexplained reports are of
alien spacecraft. Almost no scientific papers about UFOs have been published in
peer-reviewed journals. The general conclusion in the scientific community was
that the phenomenon was not worthy of serious investigation except as a cultural
artifact.

[1]. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unidentified_flying_object>

 

1.2. **Problem**

When the above general conclusion was reached data science did not exist. Now we
know that every data tells a story and the story can help us form an honest
opinion about respective phenomenon. What story can UFO observational data tell
us about UFO phenomenon itself? What are the insights? There are now publicly
available datasets about UFO observations which can be freely used in
combination with data science to answer this question. Our problem is to reveal
this story.
